[0003] Add detailed spec language for Overloading (#62)
hlsl-tc57/tc57: proposals/0003-overload-resolution.md

This proposal adopts a modified overload resolution algorithm from C++ which is
updated to account for the new conversions and conversion ranks defined in the
[implicit conversions](#implicit-conversions) section of this document.

## Detailed Design

### Overloading `[Overload]`

When a single name is declared with two or more different declarations in the
same scope, the name is _overloaded_. A declaration that declares an
overloaded name is called an _overloaded declaration_. The set of
overloaded declarations that declare the same overloaded name are that name's
_overload set_.

> Only function and template declarations can be overloaded; variable and type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only function and function template declarations can be overloaded; variable and type
```

declarations cannot be overloaded.

#### Overloadable Declarations `[Overload.Decl]`

This section specifies the cases in which a function declaration cannot be
overloaded. Any program that contains an invalid overload set is ill-formed.

An overload set is invalid if:
  * One or more declaration in the overload set only differ by return type.

```hlsl
int Yeet();
uint Yeet(); // ill-formed: decls differ only by return type
```
  * An overload set contains more than one member function declarations with
  the same _parameter-type-list_, and one of those declarations is a

>   `static` member function declaration (\ref{Classes.Static}).

Reviewer: There is an awful lot of LaTeX in here

Author: Are you requesting a change? I left the `ref` markers because there isn't a reasonable way that I could think of to indicate and preserve references to other sections in the specification.

```hlsl
class Doggo {
  static void pet();
  void pet();              // ill-formed: static pet has the same parameter-type-list
  void pet() const;        // ill-formed: static pet has the same parameter-type-list

  void wagTail();          // valid: no conflicting static declaration.

>   void wagTail() const;    // valid: no conflicting static declaration.

Reviewer: DXC does not accept const members, so this is invalid for a different reason:  https://godbolt.org/z/f84caxY6d

Author: DXC is complicated. It doesn't allow a user to write this code, but it actually does depend on this for a bunch of the built-in types. All the methods on resource objects and other types generated through hctdb.py and gen_intrin_main.txt are hard coded as `const` (see the `true` here: https://github.com/microsoft/DirectXShaderCompiler/blob/main/tools/clang/lib/Sema/SemaHLSL.cpp#L3435).

The valid candidate selection in DXC depends on respecting the const-ness of the `this` object and actually has some hacks to allow functions to be called on user-defined types stored in cbuffers.

I've posted a proposal to allow this syntax to be parsed for user functions (see: https://github.com/hlsl-tc57/tc57/pull/74), but to even match what DXC does today we need the concept of it in the overloading clause.

Reviewer: With that proposal listed as a dependency, I'll be mollified, but this is quite clearly a user-defined class

  static void bark(Doggo D);
  void bark();             // valid: static bark parameter-type-list is different
  void bark() const;       // valid: static bark parameter-type-list is different
};
```

  * An overload set contains more than one entry function declaration (\ref{Decl.Attr.Entry}).
```hlsl
[shader("vertex")]
void VS();
void VS(int);              // valid: only one entry point.

[shader("vertex")]
void Entry();

[shader("compute")]
void Entry(int);           // ill-formed: an overload set cannot have more than one entry function
```

  * An overload set contains more than one function declaration which only
  differ in parameter declarations of equivalent types.
```hlsl
void F(int4 I);
void F(vector<int, 4> I);  // ill-formed: int4 is a type alias of vector<int, 4>
```

  * An overload set contains more than one function declaration which only

>   differ in `const` specifiers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  differ in `const` parameter specifiers.
```

If we are adding const member functions, we'll need to clarify this doesn't apply to them. Even if we aren't, it might be useful

```hlsl
void G(int);
void G(const int);         // ill-formed: redeclaration of G(int)
void G(int) {}
void G(const int) {}       // ill-formed: redefinition of G(int)
```

  * An overload set contains more than one function declaration which only
  differ in parameters mismatching `out` and `inout`.
```hlsl
void H(int);
void H(in int);            // valid: redeclaration of H(int)
void H(inout int);         // valid: overloading between in and inout is allowed

void I(in int);

> void I(out int);           // valid: overloading between in and out is allowed

Reviewer: Neither of the last two are allowed by DXC. I can't imagine how they would be resolved.

https://godbolt.org/z/s6z7bqYsz

Author: So, the obnoxious thing is that DXC does allow these to be overridden (the errors are failure to resolve, not illegal overload sets). It actually can resolve the call to the `in` case if you specify constant values.

See: https://godbolt.org/z/Mf4WxMnaM

Reviewer: Literals clearly can't match the out parameter, so there is no ambiguity.  How in any compiler would a non-const variable argument be resolved? If it would just go to the `out` or `inout` version, that would be consistent, but I expect would likely catch people unawares. I think this should be ambiguous and refuse to resolve.

Author: Roughly equivalent code in C++ is not ambiguous so I'm not sure I see why this should be. Consider:

```c++

float H(int c) {return 1.0;}
float H(int &c) { c = 0; return 2.0;}

float HH(int c) {return 1.0;}
float HH(int &c) { c = 0; return 2.0;}

float fn(float f, int ct) {
    float res = H(1);
    res += HH(2);
    return res + ct;
}
```
[Compiler Explorer](https://godbolt.org/z/PE48hdzox)

Reviewer 2: FWIW I don't necessarily agree that the C++ example here is roughly equivalent. `int` and `int &` are distinct types (that can be converted between in certain situations). `int` and `in int` are certainly not distinct types. I think this is more akin to `int`/`const int` than it is to references - it's semantically less similar sure, but I mean this in terms of how these qualifiers relate to types. I can see how making this unambiguous is implementable, but I personally think it isn't very useful.

Is there some motivation for allowing `in int`/`out int` conflicts, or are we just trying to make this unambiguous because we can?

Author: I started writing this from the perspective of what works today. Today in both DXC and Clang `out` and `inout` modify the type of the parameter effectively to something reference-like (it is a reference both ASTs), which allows overloading based on `out` or `inout`.

See:
```hlsl
struct Doggo {
    void SetWagging(bool B) {
        Wagging = B;
    }

    void SetWagging(inout bool B) {
        Wagging = B;
        B = !B;
    }

    bool Wagging;
};

[numthreads(1,1,1)]
void main() {
    bool B = true;
    Doggo D = {false};
    D.SetWagging(true); // Works on Clang, ambiguous on DXC
    D.SetWagging(B); // Ambiguous everywhere
}
```
[Compiler Explorer](https://godbolt.org/z/Mqdfrzof8)

There is a very small difference in behavior today between Clang and DXC in that Clang will resolve the call if the argument is an rvalue-reference because it excludes `inout` as a candidate because you cannot bind an rvalue expression to an `inout` parameter. There is an bug in DXC here because DXC includes the `inout` function in the overload candidate set even though it isn't viable, and it rejects it later in the compiler when binding the parameter to the selected best match. Once you've selected a matching function you shouldn't be able to fail binding parameters, that can only happen if you selected a non-matching function.

```hlsl
bool Nonsense(inout bool B) {
    B = !B;
}

[numthreads(1,1,1)]
void main() {
    Nonsense(true);
}
```
[Compiler Explorer](https://godbolt.org/z/cMMKhn7cc)

If we want to change the behavior of the language to make overloading based on `inout` and `out` illegal we can do that. It probably won't break existing code (at least not code that is actually in use), but it is a change in behavior from what all existing compilers do today.

Reviewer 2: Ah, okay, I see how this behaviour falls out of how we've defined `cxvalue` in the spec now. From the perspective of the function definition (both in terms of dxc and clang's implementations but also as part of how we've specified the `cxvalue` idea) we essentially have a reference here. So in terms of implementing the overload set this is in fact pretty similar to overloads of references. The fact that there needs to be a conversion at the call site is what makes us able to differentiate between `lvalue` and `rvalue` here and do the right thing.

Given that this is kind of the natural way things fall out of the rest of the language spec I'm fairly convinced what you have here is the better path forward. Arbitrarily banning the conversion is feasible but actually adds some complexity for little value.

void J(out int);
void J(inout int);         // ill-formed: Cannot overload based on out/inout mismatch
```

#### Declaration Matching `[Overload.Match]`

Two function declarations with the same name and same parameter lists refer to
the same function if they are in the same scope (\ref{Basic.Scope}). A function
declaration in a containing scope is not the same as a function of the same

> name and parameter list in a contained scope.

Reviewer: HLSL has inheritance, so some language about member functions in derived classes versus base classes is warranted

Author: Class declarations are scopes, so they don't need to be called out separately.

Reviewer: The C++ spec disagrees and so do I https://timsong-cpp.github.io/cppwp/n3337/over#dcl

Author: The C++ spec does not disagree with my point, it actually states explicitly exactly what I said:

> A function member of a derived class is _not_ in the same scope as a function member of the same name in a base class.

A function declared in a base class, and a function of the same name and parameter list declared in a derived class are defined in different scopes, so they are different functions. I did not feel it was necessary to re-state that derived classes and base classes are different scopes.

Do you have suggested language that you would like to see included here?

#### Overload Resolution `[Overload.Res]`

_Overload resolution_ is process by which a function call is mapped to
a the best overloaded function declaration. Overload resolution uses set of
functions called the _candidate set_, and a list of expressions that
comprise the argument list for the call.

Overload resolution selects the function to call in the following
contexts:

  * invocation of a function named in a function call expression;
  * invocation of a function call operator on a class object named in
  function call syntax;
  * invocation of the operator referenced in an expression;
  * invocation of a user-defined conversion function for copy-initialization of
    an object of class type; and
  * invocation of a user-defined conversion function for initializing an object
    of non-class type from an expression of class type.

In each of these contexts a unique method is used to construct the overload
candidate set and argument expression list.

##### Candidate Functions and Argument Lists `[Overload.Res.Sets]`

At each point where an overload must be resolved an implementation will generate

> a _candidate set_, containing all possible candidate functions, and the argument

Reviewer: What is the protocol for italics? It seems for the most part that the first introduction of a term is italicized and subsequently not, but this is an exception

Author: ```suggestion
a candidate set, containing all possible candidate functions, and the argument
```

> list for the overloaded call. The subclauses under \ref(Overload.Res.Sets)

Reviewer: This is a reference to the current section

Author: intentionally so, I guess we could write it as "this clause".

Reviewer: I would prefer that

Author: ```suggestion
list for the overloaded call. The subclauses under this clause
```

define the process by which the candidate set and argument lists are constructed
in each context where overload resolution occurs.

A candidate set may include both member and non-member functions to be resolved
against the same argument set. Member functions have an extra _implicit object
parameter_, representing the object the function is called on. For the purposes
of overload resolution a static member function is considered to have an
implicit object parameter.

When appropriate the context shall construct an _implied object argument_
referring to the object operated on.

> The implicit object parameter and implied object argument if present are always

Reviewer: It's unclear that the "if present" applies to both parameter and argument. It could be moved to the front of the sentence, which would simplify the comma requirements as here it should have commas on both sides, but I think this is cleaner:
```suggestion
Any implicit object parameter or implied object argument is always
```

the first parameter or argument.

The type of the implicit object parameter is: lvalue reference `cv T`; where `T`
is the class containing the declaration of the function, and `cv` is the

> _cv-qualification_ on the function declaration.

Reviewer: HLSL doesn't have `volatile` at all and doesn't allow `const` on function declarations. If we really think `volatile` is in the future of HLSL, I suppose we could call the const qualifier `cv-qualification`, but there is, unfortunately, currently no way to have a const implicit `this` argument

Author: There is no way in a user-defined function to have a const-qualified `this`, however many of the built-in data types do.

Let me separate out two different issues:

1) I've chosen to use the grammar `cv-qualification` and that notation to align with the C++ definition with no intention of adding the `volatile` keyword. `cv-qualification` is already in use in the HLSL spec language we've adopted. If you think we should change that please file an issue, but for now this proposal is consistent with the existing spec, and we shouldn't change it.

2) I understand (although disagree) with your point above about the example spellings, but regardless of whether or not the cv-qualification is allowed to be spelled for a member function declaration (that is a separate proposal), I think the overload resolution rules need to be adapted to address this.

Consider the following code that DXC compiles "successfully":

```hlsl
Texture2D A;

struct Tex {
  int Loads;
  Texture2D B;

  float4 Load(uint Idx) {
    Loads += 1;
    return B.Load(Idx);
  }
};

float4 GetTex(const inout Tex T) {
    return T.Load(0);
}

float4 Get(const Texture2D T) {
    return T.Load(0);
}

float4 main() : SV_Target {
    Tex T = {0, A};
    float4 Result = GetTex(T) + Get(A);
    return Result + T.Loads;
}
```
[Compiler Explorer](https://godbolt.org/z/x15qfGhjM)

This code illustrates two things: (1) that calling functions on const objects is required for DXC, and (2) that DXC currently does so in a way that violates the const-ness of the objects.

The question that we need to answer is "do we think DXC is doing the right thing, or do we need to fix it?"

The proposal here is that DXC's built-in types (which already have const-qualified methods) should be respected, and we should by these rules disallow resolving a user-defined member function against a `const` object unless we also adopt the proposal in https://github.com/hlsl-tc57/tc57/pull/74.

> Implied object arguments behave the same as any explicit argument, no temporary

Reviewer: This transition makes it sound like that's the case for any explicit argument instead of an exception
```suggestion
Implied object arguments behave the same as any explicit argument except that no temporary
```

object shall be created to hold the argument for the implicit object parameter
except when the implicit object parameter is a member of a
_cbuffer-declaration_.

If a candidate is a function template, candidate specializations are generated
through template argument deduction (\ref{Template.Deduction}), candidates are
then handled as any other candidate. A name may refer to more than one function
template, in which case candidate functions shall be generated for each function
template to form the full candidate set.

**Function Call Syntax `[Overload.Res.Call]`**

```
postfix-expression ( \opt{expression-list} )
```

In a function call (\ref{Expr.Post.Call}), if the _postfix-expression_ names a
candidate set comprised of overloaded functions and/or function templates, the
overload resolves as to a named function (\ref{Overload.Res.Call.Named}). If the

> _postfix-expression_ names an object of class type the overload is resolved as a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
_postfix-expression_ names an object of class type, the overload is resolved as a
```

call to an object of class type (\ref{Overload.Res.Call.Object}).

_Call to a Named Function `[Overload.Res.Call.Named]`_

In a call to a named function, the _postfix-expression_ must be one of the
forms:

```
postfix-expression:
  postfix-expression . id-expression
  primary-expression
```

In the first grammar production the _id-expression_ is the name of the function

> to be called, and the _postfix-expression_ preceeding the `.` operator. This

Reviewer: If the sentence is otherwise fine, it still needs these changes
```suggestion
In the first grammar production, the _id-expression_ is the name of the function
to be called, and the _postfix-expression_ preceding the `.` operator. This
```

> to be called, and the _postfix-expression_ preceeding the `.` operator. This

Reviewer: This sentence doesn't sound quite right. Should it be 
```suggestion
In the first grammar production, the function call is the _id-expression_, which is the name of the function
to be called, and the _postfix-expression_ preceding the `.` operator. This
```

Author: No, the function call is the whole expression. This is talking about the _name_ of the function as used for overload resolution.

formation represents a _qualified_ function call, where the _postfix-expression_
must be an object of class type, and the call is looked up as a member function
of that object. The function names found by that lookup constitute the overload
candidate set for the call. The argument list for the call is the
_expression-list_ in the call with the left operand of the `.` operator
prepended as the implicit object parameter (\ref{Overload.Res.Sets}).

> In the second grammar production the name is not qualified by an object

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the second grammar production, the name is not qualified by an object
```

parameter, so it is an unqualified call. Name lookup occurs as normal for name

> lookup of a function call (\ref{Basic.Lookup}), function declarations found

Reviewer: Need either a period or semicolon here. I prefer a new sentence
```suggestion
lookup of a function call (\ref{Basic.Lookup}). Function declarations found
```

constitute the candidate set. The candidate set for an unqualified call will be
comprised either entirely of non-member functions or entirely of member
functions of some class `T`. If the candidate set is entirely non-member
functions, the argument list is the _expression-list_. If the candidate set is
entirely member functions of class `T`, the argument list is the
_expression-list_ with an implied object argument prepended. If the call
expression occurs in a context where an implicit object `this` is in scope and

> of class type `T` or a type `T\``, the `this` object will be the implicit object

Reviewer: Was the backtick intended or the more usual prime symbol? It isn't referenced again and I'm unsure if it's meant to reference a class type derived from `T`, which makes sense, or something else I've not thought of. It doesn't specify that the type is a class type, which is confusing.
```suggestion
of class type `T` or a class type `T\'` derived from `T`, the `this` object will be the implicit object
```

Author: I didn't care to want to use a proper prime symbol in the markdown because it's not a standard keyboard symbol and I assumed people could get enough context using a backtick.

Your suggestion didn't remove the escape, so unless you feel strongly about it I'll ignore this.

argument, otherwise a contrived argument of type `T` will become the implied
object argument. If overload resolution selects a non-static member function,
and the implicit object argument is a contrived argument, the call is
ill-formed.

_Call to a Object of Class Type `[Overload.Res.Call.Object]`_

If the _primary-expression_ in the function call expression is a class object of
type `T`, then the set of candidate functions will include the call operators of
`T` obtained by name lookup of the name `operator()` (\ref{Basic.Lookup}).

> For this formulation the argument list consists of the _expression-list_ from

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this formulation, the argument list consists of the _expression-list_ from
```

the call syntax with the implicit object argument prefixed. The implicit object
argument in this form is the object produced from the evaluated
_postfix-expression_.

**Operators in Expressions `[Overload.Res.Oper]`**

Operators in an expression where no operands have a class or enumeration type
are assumed to be built-in operators and interpreted following \ref{Expr}.

> If either operand is of class or enumeration type, overload resolution

Reviewer: Enum operator overloading represents another dependency on a yet-to-be-submitted non-member operator proposal

determines which operator function or built-in operator is resolved for the
expression.

The table below maps unary and binary operator expressions to equivalent member
and non-member function call expressions. In the table `@` represents any
spellable operator, and `a` and `b` represent arguments to the operator.

| Expression | Member function   | Non-member function |
| @a         | (a).operator@()   | operator@(a)        |
| a@b        | (a).operator@(b)  | operator@(a,b)      |

> | a[b]       | (a).operator[](b) |                     |

Reviewer: The last column assumes the introduction of non-member operator overloads

Author: yes

Reviewer: Where is that proposal?

Author: https://github.com/hlsl-tc57/tc57/pull/115

Given the table above, operand `a` is of type `T1`, and operand `b` is of type
`T2`. `T1` must be of class or enumeration type, and `T2` may be of any type
including `T1`. The candidate set for operator resolution is constructed by the
process:

* If `T1` is a class type, the result of qualified lookup of `operator@` is
  added to the set.
* The result of unqualified lookup of `operator@` in the context of the
  expression excluding the results from step 1. If no operand is of class type,
  only functions where `T1` or `T2` are enumerations are added to the set.
* The built-in operators of `operator@` from the operators defined in
  \ref{Overload.Builtin} are added to the set.

The left operand to built-in assignment operators, may not have user-defined
conversion applied to it, and no temporary may be introduced to hold it.

If the operator is the `,` operator, and there are no viable functions, the

> built-in operator is used.

Reviewer: I don't think the comma operator is included in the 2021 documentation, but it does work

Author: yes, lots of things are not in the HLSL documentation and work.

Reviewer: I'm well aware. Are you asking me to refrain from mentioning such cases? Given that we are trying to make sound judgements based on a combination of documentation and compiler behavior, I considered that a relevant fact.

In the meantime, perhaps someone who is able might consider updating the blog or wiki

https://devblogs.microsoft.com/directx/announcing-hlsl-2021/#member-operator-overloading
https://github.com/microsoft/DirectXShaderCompiler/wiki/HLSL-2021

Author: Is there a specific change you're requesting to the spec? Mentioning that it is different from the documentation but matches the implementation isn't actionable.

This is not the right forum to request that Microsoft update their blog posts or other documentation.

Reviewer: I was trying to explain why I thought the point I was making was relevant. Your response was entirely dismissive of it. I'm not arguing that we should remove support for the comma operator, but that its absence from any documentation at present should make that part of the conversation since we will have many instances of things that are absent from documentation and present in the implementation. Some of them we will decide to keep as the implementation provides. Others we may not. I thought perhaps you would be interested in updating documentation to eliminate this conflict, but it seems we have not even had the conversation, so I'll ask directly:

Are we including the comma operator? I think we should. You may choose to make documentation reflect that. It is outside this forum, but it would be helpful presuming we go the way I suggest.

Author: I apologize if my comment came off as dismissive. You've left comments that aren't actionable (at least not in the context of TC57), and I've been genuinely unsure what you're asking for.

I don't see any reason why we would exclude the comma operator, which is why I included it.

**Initialization by Conversion `[Overload.Res.Convert]`**

An object of class type or non-class type `T` may be initialized with an
initializing expression of class type `S` invoking a user-defined conversion.

The candidate set of conversion functions will be the non-explicit conversion
functions of `S` and its base classes.

> The argument list has one argument which is the initializer expression.

Reviewer: Relies on introduction of conversion operator overloads, another unsubmitted proposal.

Author: Conversion operators is not a different proposal, that was always part of this proposal. They were intended and expected to work when HLSL 2021 released, but didn't.

##### Viable Functions `[Overload.Res.Viable]`

Given the candidate set and argument expressions as determined by the
relevant context (\ref{Overload.Res.Sets}), a subset of viable functions can be
selected from the candidate set.

A function candidate $F(P_0 ... P_m)$ is not a viable function for a call
with argument list $A_0 ... A_n$ if:

* The function has fewer parameters than there are
  arguments in the argument list ($m < n$).
* The function has more parameters than there are arguments to the
  argument list ($m > n$), and function parameters $ P_{n+1} ... P_m $ do not
  all have default arguments.
* There is not an implicit conversion sequence that converts each argument
  $A_i$ to the type of the corresponding parameter $P_i$.

##### Best Viable Function `[Overload.Res.Best]`

For an overloaded call with arguments $A_0 ... A_n$, each viable function
$F(P_0 ... P_m)$, has a set of implicit conversion sequences $ICS_0(F) ... ICS_m(F)$
defining the conversion sequences for each argument $A_i$ to the
type of parameter $P_i$.

A viable function $F$ is defined to be a better function than another

> viable function $f\`$ if for all arguments $ICS_i(F)$ is not a worse

Reviewer: More backticks instead of `'`, suggesting it's intentional. At least how github renders it looks pretty strange to me https://github.com/llvm-beanz/tc57/blob/01ee4ca8be6f9960e8c469d60967ef968d7a0e5f/proposals/0003-overload-resolution.md#best-viable-function-overloadresbest

least two of these declarations specify a default argument that made the
function viable, the program is ill-formed.

```hlsl
void F(int X = 1);
void F(float Y = 2.0f);

void Fn() {
  F(1);     // Okay.
  F(3.0f);  // Okay.
  F();      // Ill-formed.
}
```

##### Implicit Conversion Sequences `[Overload.ICS]`

An _implicit conversion sequence_ is a sequence of conversions which
converts a source value to a prvalue of destination type. In overload resolution
the source value is the argument expression in a function call, and the
destination type is the type of the corresponding parameter of the function
being called.

When a parameter is a cxvalue an _inverted implicit conversion sequence_ is
required to convert the parameter type back to the argument type
for writing back to the argument expression lvalue. An inverted implicit
conversion sequence must be a well-formed implicit conversion sequence where the
source value is the implicit cxvalue of the parameter type, and the destination
type is the argument expression's lvalue type.

A well-formed implicit conversion sequence is either a _standard conversion
sequence_, or a _user-defined conversion sequence_.

> In the following contexts an implicit conversion sequence can only be a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following contexts, an implicit conversion sequence can only be a
```

value to the destination type, the implicit conversion sequence is defined to be
the unique conversion sequence designated the _ambiguous conversion sequence_.
For the purpose of ranking implicit conversion sequences, the
ambiguous conversion sequence is treated as a user-defined sequence that is
indistinguishable from any other user-defined conversion sequence. If overload
resolution selects a function using the ambiguous conversion sequence as the
best match for a call, the call is ill-formed.

**Standard Conversion Sequences `[Overload.ICS.SCS]`**

The conversions that comprise a standard conversion sequence and the
composition of the sequence are defined in Chapter \ref{Conv}.

Each standard conversion is given a category and rank as defined in the table
below:

| Conversion | Category | Rank | Reference |
|------------|----------|------|-----------|
| No conversion | Identity | Exact Match | |
| Lvalue-to-rvalue | Lvalue Transformation | Exact Match | \ref{Conv.lval} |
| Array-to-pointer | Lvalue Transformation | Exact Match | \ref{Conv.array} |
| Qualification | Qualification Adjustment | Exact Match | \ref{Conv.qual} |

> | Vector Scalar splat conversion | Scalar Extension Conversion | Conversion Extension | \ref{Conv.vsplat} |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Vector Scalar splat (without conversion) | Scalar Extension | Extension | \ref{Conv.vsplat} |
| Vector Scalar splat conversion | Scalar Extension Conversion | Conversion Extension | \ref{Conv.vsplat} |
```

> | Matrix Scalar splat conversion | Scalar Extension Conversion | Conversion Extension | \ref{Conv.msplat} |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Matrix Scalar splat (without conversion) | Scalar Extension | Extension | \ref{Conv.msplat} |
| Matrix Scalar splat conversion | Scalar Extension Conversion | Conversion Extension | \ref{Conv.msplat} |
```

| Integral promotion | Promotion | Promotion | \ref{Conv.iconv} & \ref{Conv.rank.int} |
| Floating point promotion | Promotion | Promotion | \ref{Conv.fconv} & \ref{Conv.rank.float} |
| Component-wise promotion | Promotion | Promotion | \ref{Conv.cwise} |

> | Scalar splat promotion | Scalar Extension Promotion | Promotion Extension | \ref{Conv.vsplat} |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Vector Scalar splat promotion | Scalar Extension Promotion | Promotion Extension | \ref{Conv.vsplat} |
| Matrix Scalar splat promotion | Scalar Extension Promotion | Promotion Extension | \ref{Conv.msplat} |
```

> | Scalar splat promotion | Scalar Extension Promotion | Promotion Extension | \ref{Conv.vsplat} |

Reviewer: It might be preferable to cluster the splats together like the way the truncations are

Author: They are listed in their ranked order.

Author: So, the intent of this table is to render with groupings of categories and ranks. There are some errors here specifically with the matrix elements repeating instead of merging rows in the table.

<img width="1075" height="572" alt="Screenshot 2026-06-23 at 9 10 01 AM" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/6a66a100-1647-4171-97bc-3bb3479efd0e" />

The goal is to group conversions by categories and ranks to simplify. Markdown tables aren't as flexible as LaTeX, so some of this gets lost.

| Integral conversion | Conversion | Conversion | \ref{Conv.iconv} |

> | Floating point conversion | Convesrion | Conversion | \ref{Conv.fconv} |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Floating point conversion | Conversion | Conversion | \ref{Conv.fconv} |
```

| Floating-integral conversion | Conversion | Conversion | \ref{Conv.fpint} |

> | Boolean conversion | Convesrion | Conversion | \ref{Conv.bool} |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Boolean conversion | Conversion | Conversion | \ref{Conv.bool} |
```

| Component-wise conversion | Conversion | Conversion | \ref{Conv.cwise} |
| Scalar splat conversion | Scalar Extension Conversion | Conversion Extension | \ref{Conv.vsplat} |
| Vector truncation (without conversion) | Dimensionality Reduction | Truncation | \ref{Conv.vtrunc} |
| Vector truncation promotion | Dimensionality Reduction Promotion | Promotion Truncation | \ref{Conv.vtrunc} |
| Vector truncation conversion | Dimensionality Reduction Conversion | Conversion Truncation | \ref{Conv.vtrunc} |
| Matrix truncation (without conversion) | Dimensionality Reduction | Truncation | \ref{Conv.vtrunc} |
| Matrix truncation promotion | Dimensionality Reduction Promotion | Promotion Truncation | \ref{Conv.vtrunc} |
| Matrix truncation conversion | Dimensionality Reduction Conversion | Conversion Truncation | \ref{Conv.vtrunc} |

If a scalar splat conversion occurs in a conversion sequence where all other
conversions are **Exact Match** rank, the conversion is ranked as

> **Extension**. If a scalar splat occurs in a conversion

Reviewer: **Extension** is not a rank listed above, only **Conversion Extension** and **Promotion Extension**

sequence with a **Promotion** conversion, the conversion is ranked as
**Promotion Extension**. If a scalar splat occurs in a conversion
sequence with a **Conversion** conversion, the conversion is ranked as
**Conversion Extension**.

> If a vector truncation conversion occurs in a conversion sequence where all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a vector or matrix truncation conversion occurs in a conversion sequence where all
```

other conversions are **Exact Match** rank, the conversion is ranked as

> **Truncation**. If a vector truncation occurs in a conversion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Truncation**. If a vector or matrix truncation occurs in a conversion
```

sequence with a **Promotion** conversion, the conversion is ranked as

> **Promotion Truncation**. If a vector truncation occurs in a conversion

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Promotion Truncation**. If a vector or matrix truncation occurs in a conversion
```

(\ref{Expr.Conv}).

For all types `T` where `T` is an arithmetic type (\ref{Basic.Types.Arithmetic});
operators will be defined of the forms:

```
T operator+(T );
T operator-(T );
T operator~(T );
```

For all types `L`, `R` and `LR`, where `L` and `R` are any arithmetic type
(\ref{Basic.Types.Arithmetic}), and `LR` is the promoted expression type;
operators will be defined of the forms:

```
LR operator*(L , R );
LR operator/(L , R );
LR operator+(L , R );
LR operator-(L , R );
bool operator<(L , R );
bool operator>(L , R );
bool operator<=(L , R );
bool operator>=(L , R );
bool operator==(L , R );
bool operator!=(L , R );
LR operator%(L , R );
```

For all types `T` where `T` is an enumeration type (\ref{Decl.Enum}); operators
will be defined of the form:

```
bool operator<(T , T );
bool operator>(T , T );
bool operator<=(T , T );
bool operator>=(T , T );
bool operator==(T , T );
bool operator!=(T , T );
```

For all types `T` where `T` is an integral type
(\ref{Basic.Types.Arithmetic}); operators will be defined of the form:

```
LR operator&(L , R );
LR operator^(L , R );
LR operator|(L , R );
L operator<<(L , R );

> L operator>>(L , R );

Reviewer: These compile without diagnostics for floats just as the `~` and `%` operators do. I'm not sure that should be considered as being implicitly defined for those types, but if these are limited to integers, `~` and `%` should be too.

Author: Do you have an example? They seem to fail for me https://godbolt.org/z/Kq9qqW8on.

```

For all types `L` and `R` where `L` and `R` are arithmetic types
(\ref{Basic.Types.Arithmetic}), and `CVQ` is a _cv-qualifier_; operators will be
defined of the form:

```
CVQ L & operator=(CVQ L &, R );
CVQ L & operator*=(CVQ L &, R );
CVQ L & operator/=(CVQ L &, R );
CVQ L & operator+=(CVQ L &, R );
CVQ L & operator-=(CVQ L &, R );
CVQ L & operator%=(CVQ L &, R );
```

For all types `L` and `R` where `L` and `R` are integral types
(\ref{Basic.Types.Arithmetic}), and `CVQ` is a _cv-qualifier_; operators will be
defined of the form:
```
CVQ L & operator<<=(CVQ L &, R );
CVQ L & operator>>=(CVQ L &, R );
CVQ L & operator&=(CVQ L &, R );
CVQ L & operator^=(CVQ L &, R );
CVQ L & operator|=(CVQ L &, R );
```

For the boolean type `bool` operators will be defined of the form:

```
bool operator!(bool);
bool operator&&(bool, bool);
bool operator||(bool, bool);
```

For all types `L`, `R` and `LR`, where `L` and `R` are any arithmetic type
(\ref{Basic.Types.Arithmetic}), and `LR` is the promoted expression type;
the ternary operator will be defined of the form:

```
LR operator?:(bool, L , R );
```

For all types `T`, a ternary operator will be defined of the form:

```

> operator?:(bool, T , T );

Reviewer: ```suggestion
T operator?:(bool, T , T );
```

## Detailed Design

### Overloading `[Overload]`

When a single name is declared with two or more different declarations in the
same scope, the name is _overloaded_. A declaration that declares an
overloaded name is called an _overloaded declaration_. The set of
overloaded declarations that declare the same overloaded name are that name's
_overload set_.

Only function and function template declarations can be overloaded; variable and type
declarations cannot be overloaded.

#### Overloadable Declarations `[Overload.Decl]`

This section specifies the cases in which a function declaration cannot be
overloaded. Any program that contains an invalid overload set is ill-formed.

An overload set is invalid if:
  * One or more declaration in the overload set only differ by return type.

```hlsl
int Yeet();
uint Yeet(); // ill-formed: decls differ only by return type
```
  * An overload set contains more than one member function declarations with
  the same _parameter-type-list_, and one of those declarations is a
  `static` member function declaration (\ref{Classes.Static}).
```hlsl
class Doggo {
  static void pet();

>   void pet();              // ill-formed: static pet has the same parameter-type-list
>   void pet() const;        // ill-formed: static pet has the same parameter-type-list
> 
>   void wagTail();          // valid: no conflicting static declaration.
>   void wagTail() const;    // valid: no conflicting static declaration.
> 
>   static void bark(Doggo D);
>   void bark();             // valid: static bark parameter-type-list is different
>   void bark() const;       // valid: static bark parameter-type-list is different
> };

Reviewer 2: I don't know that the const overloads are really adding much here, and the fact that each example has two overloads that aren't static muddies up what this is trying to say. I'd probably go more along these lines:
```suggestion
class C {
  static void f1();
  void f1();           // ill-formed: cannot be overloaded with `static void f1()`

  static void f2();
  void f2(int);        // valid

  void f3(int);
  static void f3(int); // ill-formed: cannot be overloaded with `void f3(int)`
};
```

```

  * An overload set contains more than one entry function declaration (\ref{Decl.Attr.Entry}).
```hlsl
[shader("vertex")]
void VS();
void VS(int);              // valid: only one entry point.

[shader("vertex")]
void Entry();

[shader("compute")]
void Entry(int);           // ill-formed: an overload set cannot have more than one entry function
```

  * An overload set contains more than one function declaration which only
  differ in parameter declarations of equivalent types.
```hlsl
void F(int4 I);
void F(vector<int, 4> I);  // ill-formed: int4 is a type alias of vector<int, 4>

> ```

Reviewer 2: This doesn't seem right - this is just two declarations with the same type. Since they're not definitions, this is the same as if we do:
```hlsl
void F(int);
void F(int);
```
which seems perfectly legal to me. The related case is also not really worth including text for IMO:
```hlsl
void F(int) {}
void F(int) {} // error: redeclaration
```
this isn't an overload at all, it's just a redeclaration, which is invalid for reasons completely unrelated to overloads.

or through the resolution of an overload from an operator expression.

An overloaded operator function must be either a non-static member function or a
non-member function, and must have at least one parameter whose type is a class
or enumeration.

An overloaded operator may not change the number of operands of an operator,
except the function call operator which may have any number of operands.

The meaning of the `,` operator, which is pre-defined for all types, can be
changed by operator overloading.

Overloaded operator functions are inherited from base classes in the same way as
other base class member functions.

Only an overloaded call operator may have default arguments, no other operator
functions may be defined with default arguments. All operator functions must
take exactly the number of parameters of the corresponding operator as defined
in this subclause.

##### Unary Operators

An overloaded prefix unary operator must be implemented by a non-static member
function with no parameters or a non-member function with one parameter.

Postfix unary operators are not overloadable.

##### Binary Operators

> An overloaded binary operator must be implmeneted by a non-static member

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An overloaded binary operator must be implemented by a non-static member
```
